PrestaShopCollection component (#1645)
PrestaShop/docs: development/components/database/prestashopcollection.md

---
title: PrestaShopCollection class
---

# The PrestaShopCollection component

## Introduction

> The PrestaShopCollection component is a Collection of ObjectModel objects. It implements common useful `php` interfaces: 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The PrestaShopCollection component is a Collection of ObjectModel objects. It implements common useful `PHP` interfaces: 
```

- `Iterator`: allows for `foreach` loop on the Collection
- `ArrayAccess`: allows for offset/index access on the Collection
- `Countable`: allow for `count()` function to be used on the Collection

It eases fetching / filtering selections of ObjectModel objects.

```php
use PrestaShopCollection;

$productCollection = (new PrestaShopCollection('Product'))
    ->where('on_sale', '=', true)
    ->orderBy('reference', 'desc')
    ->setPageSize(100);

> if(count($productCollection) > 0){

Reviewer: ```suggestion
if (count($productCollection) > 0) {
```

PSR-2 ;d

>     foreach($productCollection as $product){

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    foreach ($productCollection as $product) {
```

        // do something with your product
    }
}
```

## Create a PrestaShopCollection

> To create a PrestaShopCollection, simply instanciate a PrestaShopCollection with the ObjectModel type as constructor parameter. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To create a PrestaShopCollection, simply instantiate a PrestaShopCollection with the ObjectModel type as a constructor parameter. 
```

```php
use PrestaShopCollection;

$productCollection = new PrestaShopCollection('Product');
```

> A second parameter can be used, to set the id of the lang to use (`$id_lang`), set at null by default.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A second parameter is available to set the ID of the language to use (`$id_lang`). It is `null` by default.
```

```php
use PrestaShopCollection;

> $idLang=1;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
$idLang = 1;
```

$productCollection = new PrestaShopCollection('Product', $idLang);
```

{{% notice note %}}

> Using `$id_lang` parameter will allow to set a Lang Context when querying / filtering multilang fields. If not set, multilang fields will be returned as `array` in the Collection.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Using `$id_lang` parameter will allow setting a Context language when querying/filtering multi-lang fields. If not set, multi-lang fields will be returned as an `array` in the Collection.
```

{{% /notice %}}

## Get results, count results

When your collection is created, you may need to get its content. Several methods are available to retrieve its content:

> - `getFirst()`: gets first item of the Collection

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `getFirst()`: gets the first item of the Collection
```

> - `getLast()`: gets last item of the Collection

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `getLast()`: gets the last item of the Collection
```

> - or simply access items via index, or iterate with `foreach`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- you can also access items via their index key, or iterate with `foreach`
```

```php
$productCollection = new PrestaShopCollection('Product');

$firstProduct = $productCollection->getFirst();
$lastProduct = $productCollection->getLast();

> // you can access items in the collection by index, like a regular array (the class implements ArrayAccess). Index starts at 0

Reviewer: ```suggestion
// you can access items in the collection by index, like in a regular array (this class implements ArrayAccess). The index starts at 0
```

$thirdProduct = $productCollection[2]; 

// The collection is also iterable (the class implements Iterator): 

> foreach($productCollection as $product){

Reviewer: ```suggestion
foreach ($productCollection as $product) {
```

```

- `$field` is the field's name to filter
- `$operator` is the operator to use for filtering (complete list below)
- `$value` is the value to filter against (can be a scalar or array value)
- `$method` is the method to use (defaults to `where`, or can be `having`, see below for more informations) 

### List of operators

| Operator | SQL equivalent | Accept |
| --- | --- | --- |
| = | = | Scalar, Array |
| in | IN | Array |
| != | != | Scalar, Array |
| &lt;> | != | Scalar, Array |
| notin (or NOTIN) | NOT IN | Scalar, Array |
| > | > | Scalar |
| >= | >= | Scalar |
| &lt; | &lt; | Scalar |
| &lt;= | &lt;= | Scalar |
| like (or LIKE) | LIKE | Scalar |
| notlike (or NOTLIKE) | NOT LIKE | Scalar |
| regexp (or REGEXP) | REGEXP | Scalar |
| notregexp (or NOTREGEXP) | NOT REGEXP | Scalar |

### Examples of usage

```php
$productCollection = new PrestaShopCollection('Product');
$productCollection->where('on_sale', '=', true); // find products on sale
```

```php
$productCollection = new PrestaShopCollection('Product');
$productCollection->where('reference', 'LIKE', 'REF-%'); // find products with reference beginning by "REF-"
```

> ### Having method

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### `Having` method
```

> Another method is available, `having()`, which calls `where()` with the parameter `$method` set to `having`. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There is also `having()` method available, which calls `where()` with the parameter `$method` set to `having`. 
```

```php
public function having($field, $operator, $value)
```

## Joining to associated entities (join)

When building the Collection, you may need to join with other ObjectModel entities. 
You can join on associations that are declared in the $definition of the ObjectModel. 

```php
public function join($association, $on = '', $type = null)
```

Join `manufacturer` to your `Product` collection: 

```php
$productCollection = new PrestaShopCollection('Product');
$productCollection->join('manufacturer');
```

You can join on a different field by specifying the field name as a second parameter: 

```php
$productCollection = new PrestaShopCollection('Product');
$productCollection->join('categories', 'id_category');
```

By default, a `LEFT JOIN` will be used. `INNER JOIN` or `LEFT OUTER JOIN` are also available using the third parameter:

```php
$productCollection->join('categories', 'id_category', PrestaShopCollection::LEFT_JOIN);
$productCollection->join('categories', 'id_category', PrestaShopCollection::INNER_JOIN);
$productCollection->join('categories', 'id_category', PrestaShopCollection::LEFT_OUTER_JOIN);
```

> ### Using where with join

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Using `where` with `join`
```

One of the interest of joining other ObjectModel entities to your collection, is the possibility to filter on the external entity with `where()`. 

```php
$productCollection = (new PrestaShopCollection('Product'))
    ->join('manufacturer')
    ->where('manufacturer.name', '=', 'Manufacturer AAA');
```

## Ordering a Collection (order by)

To order your collection, use the `orderBy()` method. 

```php
public function orderBy($field, $order = 'asc')
```

> Ordering can be done in ascending or descending direction, with `asc` or `desc` `$order` parameter.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Ordering can be done in ascending or descending directions, with `asc` or `desc` in the `$order` parameter.
```

```php
$productCollection = (new PrestaShopCollection('Product'))
    ->orderBy('reference', 'desc');
```

## Grouping (group by)

> To group your collection items on a field, use the `groupBy()` method. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you want to organize your collection items based on a specific field, you can make use of the `groupBy()` method.
```

```php
public function groupBy($field)
```

```php
$productCollection = (new PrestaShopCollection('Product'))
    ->groupBy('id_supplier');
```

## Paginating a Collection (offset / limit)

> When fetching large quantities of items, you may need to paginate your collection, with SQL `OFFSET / LIMIT` equivalent mecanismes. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you need to retrieve a large number of items, it may be necessary to use pagination techniques such as SQL's `OFFSET/LIMIT`. This will help you manage your collection more efficiently.
```

> To do so, use those two methods:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To do so, use these two methods:
```

```php
public function setPageNumber($page_number)
public function setPageSize($page_size)
```

> To use this feature, first, set the $page_size:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First, set the $page_size:
```

```php
$productCollection = (new PrestaShopCollection('Product'))
    ->setPageSize(100); // will get only 100 items
```

> If only `$page_size` is set, the collection will return the first `$page_size` items. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If `$page_size` is set, the collection will return the first `$page_size` items. 
```

> To do a pagination, and get the page 2 of the collection, use the following example: 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you need to paginate and access the second page of a collection, you can use the following example:
```

```php
$productCollection = (new PrestaShopCollection('Product'))
    ->setPageSize(100) // will get only 100 items
    ->setPageNumber(2); // but from page 2, equivalent to offset=(pageNumber - 1) * page_size. 
```

- Getting the page: `1` of a collection with a page_size of: `100` is the `PrestaShopCollection` equivalent of this `SQL` statement: 
    `LIMIT 100` or `LIMIT 100 OFFSET 0` or `LIMIT 0,100`

- Getting the page: `2` of a collection with a page_size of: `100` is the `PrestaShopCollection` equivalent of this `SQL` statement: 
    `LIMIT 100 OFFSET 100` or `LIMIT 100,100`

- Getting the page: `3` of a collection with a page_size of: `100` is the `PrestaShopCollection` equivalent of this `SQL` statement: 
    `LIMIT 100 OFFSET 200` or `LIMIT 200,100`

{{% notice info %}}

> Known issue: When not using `$id_lang`, and using pagination (`setPageSize()`, `setPageNumber()`), pagination will be broken. Please use a Lang Context if the entity is multi-lang enabled. 

Reviewer: I don't understand this part now. I think you were more clear when we discussed it. Pagination is broken when getting multi-lang entries with `$id_lang` provided. Yes? Because you wrote:
`Please use a Lang Context if the entity is multi-lang enabled. `

Author: ok, let me rephrase it

> Known issue: When not using `$id_lang`, and using pagination (`setPageSize()`, `setPageNumber()`), pagination will be broken. Please use a Lang Context if the entity is multi-lang enabled. 

Author: ```suggestion
Known issue: If the entity has multi-lang attributes, when not using `$id_lang` in the `PrestaShopCollection` constructor, and using pagination (`setPageSize()`, `setPageNumber()`), pagination will be broken. 
Please set an `$id_lang` in the constructor to use pagination features for entities with multi-lang attributes.
```

Author: @kpodemski is it better?

Author: To reproduce the issue, with the default PrestaShop product demo collection: 

```php
$productCollection = (new PrestaShopCollection('Product'))->setPageSize(10)->setPageNumber(1); 
var_dump(count($productCollection));
if(count($productCollection) > 0){
  foreach($productCollection as $product){
    var_dump($product->id, $product->name); 
  }
}
```

```
int(5)
int(1)
array(2) {
  [1]=>
  string(27) "Hummingbird printed t-shirt"
  [2]=>
  string(27) "Hummingbird printed t-shirt"
}
int(2)
array(2) {
  [1]=>
  string(27) "Hummingbird printed sweater"
  [2]=>
  string(27) "Hummingbird printed sweater"
}
int(3)
array(2) {
  [1]=>
  string(38) "The best is yet to come' Framed poster"
  [2]=>
  string(38) "The best is yet to come' Framed poster"
}
int(4)
array(2) {
  [1]=>
  string(34) "The adventure begins Framed poster"
  [2]=>
  string(34) "The adventure begins Framed poster"
}
int(5)
array(2) {
  [1]=>
  string(33) "Today is a good day Framed poster"
  [2]=>
  string(33) "Today is a good day Framed poster"
}
```

```php
$productCollection = (new PrestaShopCollection('Product', 1))->setPageSize(10)->setPageNumber(1); 
var_dump(count($productCollection));
if(count($productCollection) > 0){
  foreach($productCollection as $product){
    var_dump($product->id, $product->name); 
  }
}
```

```
int(10)
int(1)
string(27) "Hummingbird printed t-shirt"
int(2)
string(27) "Hummingbird printed sweater"
int(3)
string(38) "The best is yet to come' Framed poster"
int(4)
string(34) "The adventure begins Framed poster"
int(5)
string(33) "Today is a good day Framed poster"
int(6)
string(27) "Mug The best is yet to come"
int(7)
string(24) "Mug The adventure begins"
int(8)
string(23) "Mug Today is a good day"
int(9)
string(20) "Mountain fox cushion"
int(10)
string(18) "Brown bear cushion"
```
